Welcome to the Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Computer Science and Engineering, today, plays a major role in transforming every aspect of human life - in addressing social challenges and catalyzing the ongoing wave of the industrial revolution. The department is driven by its commitment to excel in next generation technology development and research. Our mission is to strengthen industry-academia collaborations and prepare our students to contribute to multi-disciplinary projects and R&D for solving problems of national interest.

Vision
To be among the top 10 departments in terms of research contributions, practical impact, and applications of Computer Science and Engineering in the country in the next 3 years, and internationally well known in some focused areas in the next 5 years. Some of our missions are to achieve excellence in research in fundamental as well as applied areas of CSE and allied subject for innovative discoveries; develop an academic ecosystem by collaborating; and develop and support the notion of “computing for all” across disciplines at the institute.



Mission
Our missions are to achieve excellence in research in fundamental as well as applied areas of CSE and allied subject for innovative discoveries; develop an academic ecosystem by collaborating; and develop and support the notion of “computing for all” across disciplines at the institute.

(M1) Achieving excellence in research in fundamental as well as applied areas of CSE and allied subjects for innovative discoveries.
(M2) Develop an academic ecosystem by collaborating within the institute, as well by means of international, national and regional institutes. The collaborations may be fostered by research visits, collaborative projects, joint thesis, internship guidance, research mentoring etc.
(M3) Develop and support the notion of “computing for all” across disciplines at the institute.
(M4) Embracing shared dialogue across disciplines and encouraging experiential learning to redefine the contours of traditional Computer Science teaching and learning. Be one of the leading departments in the country for hybrid CSE education.
(M5) Define and solve real-world problems in collaboration with industry, and develop industry- connect by means of research grants/ consultancies, and collaborative projects. Develop Start-up ecosystem in emerging areas of computing in collaboration with other departments at IIT Jodhpur.
(M6) Dissemination of knowledge without physical boundaries, i.e. classroom, online and other modes of teaching, to create a workforce which is ready to ethically solve technological challenges of the next generation.
(M7) Provide thought leadership in public policy and ethics of emerging computing technologies towards building an equitable and ethical society.



The paper titled “MorsEar: Toward Generalizable Low-Resource Covert Messaging via Earable-Based Inertial Sensing” by Mr. Garvit Chugh (Ph.D. Student), under the guidance of Dr. Suchetana Chakraborty, has received the Honourable Mention Award (Top 5% of 1,703 accepted papers) at the ACM CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2026), held in Barcelona from 13–17 April 2026.
PhD student Yogesh Kumar has been recognized as one of the Outstanding Reviewers for the British Machine Vision Conference (BMVC) 2024.
Team NeuralNinjas (Alli Khadga Jyoth, Kushal Agrawal, Nachiketa Purohit, Ritu Singh), winners of the 'Amazon ML' Challenge 2024.
Ph.D. Students Chiranjeev and Garvit were awarded the PMRF 2023.
Jayant Vyas (Ph.D. student) selected as research intern (April - October) @ Accenture Labs.
Jayant Vyas selected for student travel award for the IEEE VTC 2023 Conference.
PhD Student Abhirama P. has been awarded the Microsoft Research Travel Grant to present his work at the Main Track of IJCAI 2023 in Macao.
Mr. Ankur Nahar(Ph.D Student), working under the guidance of Dr. Debasis Das, received a travel grant for ACM ICDCN 2023 for participating in the conference at IIT Kharagpur.
Mr. Jayant Vyas (Ph.D. Student), working under the guidance of Dr. Debasis Das and Prof. Santanu Chaudhury, received the CODS - COMAD 2023 Diversity and Inclusion Track Scholarship. This Scholarship includes travel, accommodation, and a registration grant to attend CODS - COMAD 2023 at IIT Bombay.
Mr. Ankur Nahar(Ph.D. Student), working under the guidance of Dr. Debasis Das, received the ACM India Anveshan Setu Fellowship 2023 for participating in the conference.
Ms. Shruti Sureshan( M. Tech(CSE) Student), working under the guidance of Dr. Debasis Das, received a Student Travel Grant (Registration fees, Travel, and Accommodation) for attending CODS-COMAD 2023 at IIT Bombay. Presented Poster titled ‘Few-Shot Learning based Anomaly Detection in Security Applications’ at CODS-COMAD 2023, IIT Bombay.
Mr. Jayant Vyas (Ph.D. Student), working under the guidance of Dr. Debasis Das and Prof. Santanu Chaudhury, received the Best Poster Award 2023 in Industry Day at IIT Jodhpur.
Km. Bhavna (Ph.D. Student under Dr. R. Banerjee and Dr. D. Roy) won the "Best Poster" award in NAiBS 2023.
Prajwal Gatti (Research Assistant under Dr. Anand Mishra) presented his paper VisTOT at EMNLP 2022.
Nakul Sharma (3rd year B.Tech. AI) presented his paper at ICVGIP 2022.
Swapnil Mane (Ph.D. student under Dr. Suman Kundu) was awarded PMRF 2022.
Abhirama Subramanyam (Ph.D. student under Dr. Anand Mishra) and Kartik Thakral (Ph.D. student under Dr. Mayank Vatsa & Dr. Richa Singh) were awarded PMRF 2021.
Mr. Ankur Nahar, working under the guidance of Dr. Debasis Das, received the USENIX Annual Technical Conference(ATC) 2021 Student Grant for participating in the USENIX Annual Technical Conference (ATC).
Mr. Lokendra Vishwakarma, Mr. Jayant Vyas, and Mr. Ankur Nahar, working under the guidance of Dr. Debasis Das, received the ACM SIGMATRICS 2021 Student Grant for participating in the ACM SIGMATRICS 2021 Conference.
Dr. A. Mishra, Abhirama P., P. Revanth, & K. Tawatia received the Microsoft Academic Partnership Grant (MAPG), 2021, for a project on "Inference and Reasoning over Web-Scale Multimodal Knowledge Graph".
Students Bharat Biradar and Dhruv Patel have been selected for the Google Summer of Code. Congratulations to them! News Archive.




The department's compute resources include a number of powerful servers and workstations, designed to handle a wide variety of computational tasks including complex data analysis, machine learning, and high-performance computing. With their advanced hardware and capabilities, these resources provide researchers and students to the department with reliable and efficient computing power, enabling them to tackle complex problems and push the boundaries of their fields.

DGX-2 Server: NVIDIA designed the DGX-2 Server as a high-performance computing system for deep learning applications. It features 16 interconnected GPUs that provide high-speed data throughput for massive machine learning and artificial intelligence operations. The DGX-2 is also endowed with NVIDIA's Tensor Cores, which accelerate matrix operations commonly employed in deep learning tasks. One DGX-2 machine with 16 Volta 100 GPUs and 1.5 terabytes of RAM is available in the CSE lab. It comes equipped with an additional 50 terabytes of storage that is all flash-based.

DPU-GPU HPC: This architecture combines DPUs and GPUs in order to accelerate high-performance computing tasks such as deep learning, scientific simulations, and data analytics. DPUs are specialized processors designed for data movement and security tasks, whereas GPUs are designed for computationally intensive tasks like matrix operations. DPU-GPU HPC systems can accomplish high throughput and low latency by combining the two, making them suitable for a variety of applications that require large-scale data processing and analysis. The department will have this system shortly. Each system will have 128 GB of RAM and 2 Nvidia A30 GPUs.

Other GPU Systems: The department has 16 Nvidia 1080Ti GPU and 1 Nvidia A5000 GPU cards for the department users. NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1080 Ti is a graphics card that is often used in deep learning applications due to its powerful CUDA cores and high memory bandwidth. It has 3584 CUDA cores and 11 GB GDDR5X memory with a memory bandwidth of 484 GB/s. NVIDIA A5000 is based on the latest NVIDIA Ampere architecture and features 8,192 CUDA cores, 256 Tensor Cores, 64 RT Cores, 24GB GDDR6 with error-correction code (ECC) and a 384-bit memory interface.

General purpose servers: The department has several servers that are used for various purposes, including web hosting, database management, and file storage. These servers are equipped with powerful CPUs and storage, making them suitable for handling large amounts of data and serving multiple users simultaneously.



The state-of-the-art central instrumentation facility of IIT Jodhpur which was established in the year 2018 has been designated as the Central Research Facility (CRF). The CRF has an endeavour to provide advanced scientific instrumentation service in the multidisciplinary field of research to the undergraduate, graduate, Ph.D students and the faculties of this esteemed institute as well as researcher from other institutes across the country. At present a total number of 93 high end instruments are under CRF facility. Currently, The space allotted for CRF facility (Room No. 111 & 112, ground floor, Chemistry building) houses 22 equipment including various sophisticated instruments such as 500 MHz NMR, Single Crystal XRD, Powder XRD, AFM, SEM, PPMS Dynacool, SQUID, Surface area analyzer, DSC, TGA etc. Rest of the equipment under CRF facility are located at various departments of the institute. The overall day to day activities and the policy of the centre is determined by a committee of faculty of this institute. The CRF committee appointed a faculty in charge for each of the instruments under the centre for smooth running and maintenance the equipment. Further, CRF facility at IIT Jodhpur imparts an opportunity towards its users for accessing various latest and advanced instruments persuasively via a transparent online booking portal. Thus CRF facility contributes its users significantly to publish their research findings in internationally peer reviewed journals. IITJ CRF facility welcomes external users from all national institutes and R & D organizations for accessing this facility on a minimal chargeable basis.



The Main objectives of CRF facility:

Advanced scientific instrumentation service to researchers from both academic and industrial organizations.
R & D for advanced scientific instrumentation.
Technology development and innovation in the area of scientific instrumentation.
Encouraging start-ups for scientific instrumentation.



Welcome To The Office Of Research & Development (R&D)
The Office of R&D provides specialized administrative and managerial support for the operation of Sponsored Research Projects, Consultancy Projects and other R&D related activities of the Institute. The Office of R&D facilitates interaction with national and international agencies supporting research & development. Also, it promotes academia-industry interactions and collaboration with larger R&D laboratories, and liaises between Institute and funding agencies. Further, it supports Faculty Members in filing of patents and documenting IPR generated through research activity of the Institute. The Office of R&D facilitates the following:

(a) Management of Projects

Registration of Sponsored, Consulting and Institute Projects, raising Invoice/Grants-in-aid bill, receiving funds, prepare utilization certificates;
Appointment, extension and resignations of Project Staff Members; payment of salary;
Work related to Fellowships;
Project related purchases, imports and their payments;
Management of temporary advances to PIs and Project Staff Members, settlement of advances;
Payment for work assignments; and
Preparation of cheques, bank reconciliation, accounts preparation, management of investments.

(b) Management of Office

Preparation and publishing of booklets (hard and soft copies) related to Office of R&D, newsletter;
Institute’s research magazine;
Developing & maintaining database of R&D contacts in Industry, Academia and R&D Organisations in India and abroad;
Designing and preparing R&D flyers of different Departments and laboratories of the Institute; and
Managing MOUs, IPRs, Corporate Communications, Events and Relationships.




 Conduct of Courses
Each course is conducted by the instructor with the assistance of the required number of tutors,
as needed. The instructor is responsible for conducting the course, evaluating the performance
of students, awarding the grades at the end of the semester, and transmitting the grades as per
Subsection 5.2.
The student shall have access to his/her answer paper(s) of all the written examinations
conducted for a given course, which may be shown to him/her by the instructor(s) concerned.
The instructor must keep all evaluation records in his custody at least for the next six months.
A course approved by the senate of IIT Jodhpur can be conducted through either (i) direct
contact (ii) synchronized remote contact (iii) guided study mode or combination of these. In
direct contact mode, coordinator or instructor will have a face-to-face physical interaction with
the students. Synchronized remote contact mode would require the faculty and/or the students
to be concurrently connected to the class-room interaction via electronic conferencing involving
both audio and video communication. However, there has to be direct interaction between
faculty and students for limited hours (typically 25%) of the stipulated contact hours. In guided
study mode, a faculty would guide a single or a group of students to take up study of an
approved course via self-learning and discussion-oriented contact sessions. This mode can be also
adopted for enabling a student to take up study of a new course, not yet approved by the senate,
under supervision of a faculty. All formal evaluation components applicable to courses being run
through any one of the above-mentioned modes will be conducted under direct physical supervision of a faculty. All laboratory components of a course requiring use of a specialized
facility will be conducted through direct contact.


MAKE-UP EXAMINATIONS
A student who has missed minor(s) or the major examination due to genuine reasons like illness
etc. may be permitted to write a make-up examination for the missed components. The student
should make an application to the Dean (Academics) through the course instructor within ten
days from the date of the missed examination, explaining the reasons for their absence.
Applications received after this period need not be entertained. The permission to take a
make-up examination will be given under exceptional circumstances such as admission to a
hospital due to illness. A student needs to produce the necessary document subject to one of the
following categories:
● Students residing in the Hostels should produce a Medical Certificate issued by the
Medical Officer of the Institute that he/she was admitted in the Hospital during the period
of the missed quiz/exam.
● Students residing in the Hostels and taking medical consultation with outside Doctors are
required to obtain written permission from the Medical Officer of the Institute Hospital
before they proceed for such consultation.
● Students residing in the hostels but taking medical consultation with outside Doctors are
required to obtain an endorsement on the certificate of treatment by the Medical Officer
of the Institute Hospital.
● A student staying outside the Campus permanently / temporarily must produce a medical
certificate from the Registered Medical Practitioner and the same should be duly
endorsed by the parent/guardian.
A slot- wise make-up examination for major will be held during the makeup /
supplementary week as per Academic Calendar of the subsequent semester for those
who are permitted to take the make-up examination. A student who misses this make-up
examination will not normally be given another make-up examination. However, in
exceptional cases of prolonged illness resulting in the student missing a make-up
examination, the Chairman of the Senate, in consultation with the Dean of Academics
may permit the student to appear for make-up examination any day before the end of the
first week of the next semester. Under no circumstances prorating can be done for the
missed examinations or attendance


 Self-study Course
A self-study course will be from the list of courses approved by the Senate. The main features of a
self-study course are as follows:
● A student may be allowed to register for an elective course as a self-study course
provided that the course is not running in that semester as a regular course or a student
is not on campus during the course with prior approval of the competent authority.
● A student may also be permitted to register for a core or program compulsory course in
self-study mode provided he/she has failed in it earlier and the course is not being offered
as a regular course during that semester or a student is not on campus during the course
with prior approval of the competent authority.
● Students should apply for a self-study course with the appropriate recommendation of a
Course Coordinator and DUGC/DRC/interdisciplinary program committee. The final
sanction of a self-study course to a student is made by the Dean (Academics).
● Formal classroom engagement may not be there for a self-study course but laboratory,
design and computation exercises will be conducted if they form an integral part of the
course.
● The Course Coordinator conducts the assessment as per the evaluation norms for the
award of letter grade at the end of the semester.
● Not exceeding 10% of the total graded credit can be opted as a self-study course.
● A self-study course will appear with the approved course title on the transcript.




 Evaluation
The performance of students in a course is evaluated continuously, using their interaction in the
classroom, and performances in examinations, the laboratory work (if any), and term-papers and
projects.
The performance of students in a course is evaluated through examinations and on a continuous
basis. The Senate will decide from time to time on the system of tests and examinations in each
subject in each semester.
● Minor 1, Minor 2 and Major examinations are mandatory components of the evaluation of
a regular 14-week long lecture course. The minor examinations shall be of 60 minutes
duration and the major examination of 120 minutes. Fractal courses (less than 3 credits)
must have at least one examination.
● The total weightage of the examination component (three examinations for a 14-week
long course) shall be between 40% to 60% of the total weightage of evaluation measure.
● Evaluation policy has to be known from the first day of the class.
● The continuous evaluation may include but not limited to interaction in the classroom,
quizzes, assignments, tutorials, laboratory work, term papers and projects.

UNDERGRADUATE PROGRAMMES OF IITJ: CURRICULUM FOR A GLOBAL ENGINEER
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur is committed to educational excellence through a strong student-focused educational experience and to provide quality education with the contemporary and highly professional curricula. In order to achieve this objective, IIT Jodhpur has undergone thorough curriculum change in the year 2019 and came up with a new curriculum. This article highlights philosophy ingrained in the new curriculum and some salient features.
 
The societal challenges of the 21st century are profound and wide-ranging. Basic needs such as energy, food and water, housing, mobility, and health will become even more acute as the world population exceeds 9 billion. The demands for sustainable development will require redefined and innovative engineering talent and leadership. The emergence of a connected, competitive, and entrepreneurial global economy, in which successful engineers increasingly need technical competency and professional skills that differ from what worked in the past. These reasons build up a clear case for disruptive revision of the undergraduate curriculum.
 
Some of the attributes expected of modern engineers are:
 1.	 Flexibility to understand and manage rapidly evolving technologies;
 2. 	 Ability to identify, define as well as solve problems;
 3. 	 Proficiency in theory and applications;
 4. 	 Skill for handling out-of-the-box engineering challenges;
 5. 	 Capable of Creative Thinking;
 6. 	 Experience of entrepreneurship;
 7. 	 Understanding of public policy implications.
 	 
Today the creative function of engineering is expected to be viewed and understood in the broader context of the new patterns of knowledge creation across disciplines obliterating traditional boundaries between science, humanities and social sciences, arts and engineering. IIT Jodhpur has pursued a newer structure of programmes in addition to classical programmes to address these opportunities.

Objectives

The objective of the new curriculum is to define a novel instructional paradigm and content plan to address modern demands of professional education (as outlined above) based upon the philosophy of outcome-based education. The curriculum builds on four guiding principles of outcome-based academic, i.e., 

 1.	 All students can learn and succeed but maybe not on the same day or in the same way  

 2.	 Each success by a student breeds more success (success must open up the opportunity of more success)

 3.	 Academic institutions create and nurture the conditions of success

 4.	 The academic system acknowledges and respects challenging initiatives without fear of failure.

 

Unique features of the UG curriculum

Unique features of the undergraduate curriculum are highlighted next:

The curriculum emphasized the fundamentals of basic and engineering sciences to enable learners to have a broader multi-disciplinary perspective for the specialisation being pursued. Departmental courses focus on fundamental scientific principles behind technologies.
Avenues created for pursuing co-curricular and extra-curricular creative interests as an integral component of the curricular content by introducing nongraded courses on social connect, performing arts, and communication skills. As an outcome of these pursuits, a student is expected to improve their capacity to imagine and to build up enthusiasm to pursue unknown territories through purely creative ventures.


Early design courses are introduced which focus more heavily on conceptual design methods and less on discipline-specific artefacts. These courses teach that design is open-ended; that there are numerous engineering challenges beyond domains of traditional disciplines, and that students could begin to think and work like engineers.
Avenues created for making students continuously engaged in these intellectual processes throughout the curriculum and at an increasingly sophisticated level through design credits. Such continual integrative experiences help students to expand and deepen their “internal knowledge structure” of the discipline, which will aid their eventual retrieval and use. 
Opportunities and challenges continue to require engineers to literally invent the future by developing breakthrough technologies that solve global problems and enhance the quality of life. Entrepreneurship education has been introduced in the curriculum as a minor which gives them solid experience in product design and development, prototyping, technology trends, and market analysis


Options of Department Area Specialisation and five-year B.Tech.+M.Tech. allows students to pursue in-depth study of the topics of interest belonging to the programme. Department Area Specialization in Engineering Innovation has also been introduced with the aim of making students Industry Ready by offering five months Practical Project jointly with an Industry or R & D organization. Students get real-world experience working for an industry or R & D organization on a project that complements their academic experience.
With the rapid change in the contours of engineering education due to emergence of Miniaturization, Parallelism, Smart Materials, Bio-mimetic Systems, AI and Cognitive Systems, the role of engineering institute is not only preparing students in their major areas of study but also on other skills to encourage interdisciplinary teams to address challenges faced by the society. The emphasis has been laid on the development of technical skills in interdisciplinary areas and upcoming fields by introducing various Interdisciplinary specializations such as AI, CPS, IoT, Robotics, Smart Healthcare, etc.
With evolving patterns of knowledge creation across disciplines and obliterating traditional boundaries between science and engineering, a capability linked Double B.Tech. with second degree in Engineering Science is introduced to pursue newer structures of programmes in addition to classical programmes to provide ability to apply diverse knowledge and skills flexibly in novel situations.


 With changing paradigms of Evaluation and Assessment, the performance of students in a course is evaluated not only thorough examinations but also on a continuous basis which include but not limited to interaction in the classroom interaction, quizzes, assignments, tutorials, laboratory work, term papers and projects. Technology-enabled aids have been assimilated into continuation evaluation as an integrated component. 


The finer granularity in grading has been introduced to allow for more precise and fairer grading, provide a more reliable indication of student performance, and give students a better opportunity to improve their grades.
Throughout the curriculum Efforts have been laid down at building up Strong Foundation, Enabling Continuous Learning, Inter-disciplinary Breadth, Design Thinking, Imbibing Creative and Critical Thinking, Social Responsibility and Professional Ethics, and Sustainability as distinct thematic Commitment.


What Academic Facilities are available at IIT Jodhpur? 
 	IIT Jodhpur has established state-of-the-art teaching and research laboratories. These laboratories have advanced equipment and instrumentation of international standard, which are used extensively in teaching and research. The major laboratories include Heat Transfer, Fluid Mechanics, Electronic Circuit Laboratory, Robotics, Electro Mechanical Energy Conversion Laboratory, and Solar Radiation.
 	The Library of the Institute has a collection of about 12,000 volumes of books comprising of textbooks, research and reference books, monographs, etc. In addition, the Library provides access to a range of electronic resources from professional and scholarly societies and publishers, such as American Society for Mechanical Engineers, Institute for Electrical & Electronics Engineers, and Association for Computing Machinery. Also, it subscribes to popular scientific, research and archival databases. The Library operates in a computerized environment with automated member & circulation services, and digital library services. Memberships, circulation, reference & information service, inter-library loans & document lending services, current awareness service, and digital library service, are some of the important services that are presently offered. Visit http://library.iitj.ac.in for more information.
 	
IIT Jodhpur is building close relations with select international universities, research institutes and corporations. For example, Memoranda of Understanding have been signed with the University of Waterloo, the University of Western Ontario in Canada, and the University at Rovira i Virgili (Tarragona, Spain). These MoUs allow for short-term exchange of Students and Faculty Members.



 (Q2) 	Is any financial assistance available?
 	
The IITJ facilitates scholarships and financial aids through numerous ways to its students. The Office of Students encourages and assists the students to apply and being awarded scholarships like National and State SC/ ST schemes like NSP, Top Class etc; Fee Remission to SC/ST students, CSIR/UGC/MHRD grants and other scholarships. 

National Scholarship Portal (NSP)-one-stop solution through which various services starting from student application, application receipt, processing, sanction and disbursal of various scholarships to Students are enabled. National Scholarships Portal is taken as Mission Mode Project under National e-Governance Plan (NeGP).
Central Sector Scholarship Scheme for Top Class Education for SC/ST students- This scholarship is provided to the meritorious students belonging to the SC/ST category. Facilities like tuition fees waiver, living expenses, books and a computer. 
Fee Remission- Tuition fee remission and tuition fee waiver will be given as per the Ministry of Education regulations (F. No. 24-2/2016-TS-1, dated 08 April 2016) to the eligible students. 
The SC/ST/PH students shall get complete fee waiver 
The most economically backward students (whose family income is less than 1 lakh rupees per annum) shall get full remission of the fee.  
The other economically backward students (whose family income is between 1 lakh to 5 lakh rupees per annum) shall get remission of 2/3rd of the tuition fee.
All students shall have access to interest free loan under the Vidyalaxmi scheme for the total portion of the tuition fee payable.

MAKE-UP EXAMINATIONS
A student who has missed minor(s) or the major examination due to genuine reasons like
illness etc. may be permitted to write a make-up examination for the missed components. The
student should make an application to the Dean (Academics) through the course instructor
within ten days from the date of the examination missed, explaining the reasons for their
absence. Applications received after this period need not be entertained. The permission to take
a make-up examination will be given under exceptional circumstances such as admission to a
hospital due to illness. A student needs to produce the necessary document subject to one of
the following categories:
● Students residing in the Hostels should produce a Medical Certificate issued by the
Medical Officer of the Institute that he/she was admitted to the Hospital during the
period of the missed quiz/exam.
● Students residing in the Hostels and taking medical consultation with outside Doctors are
required to obtain written permission from the Medical Officer of the Institute Hospital
before they proceed for such consultation.
● Students residing in the hostels but taking medical consultation with outside Doctors are
required to obtain an endorsement on the certificate of treatment by the Medical Officer
of the Institute Hospital.
● A student staying outside the Campus permanently / temporarily must produce a
medical certificate from the Registered Medical Practitioner and the same should be duly
endorsed by the parent/guardian.
A slot-wise make-up examination for major will be held during the makeup / supplementary
week as per Academic Calendar of the subsequent semester for those who are permitted to take
the make-up examination. A student who misses this make-up examination will not normally be
given another make-up examination. However, in exceptional cases of prolonged illness
resulting in the student missing a make-up examination, the Chairman of the Senate, in
consultation with the Dean of Academics may permit the student to appear for make-up
examination any day before the end of the first week of the next semester. Under no
circumstances, prorating can be done for the missed examinations or attendance.

1. INTRODUCTION
Academic programmes at Indian Institute of Technology, Jodhpur are designed to develop the
highest calibre human resource capable of understanding the new patterns of knowledge
creation across disciplines obliterating traditional boundaries between science, humanities,
social sciences and engineering. IIT Jodhpur aims to produce quality professionals who would be
able to address profound and wide-ranging societal challenges of the 21st century such as
energy, food, water, housing, mobility, and health. In addition to imparting scientific
knowledge, IIT Jodhpur endeavours to inculcate human qualities of courage, integrity, fairness,
humility and team effort among its graduates through curricular, co-curricular and
extra-curricular activities on campus.
The undergraduate academic programmes focus on developing a temper for the life long
process of learning, creative thinking and exploring. The postgraduate academic programmes
focus on developing a deep understanding of the subject of study coupled with creative
inquisitiveness and the ability to address and solve new problems with a free and objective
mind.
The academic programmes are based on three tenets of (1) semester system, (2) Credit
System and (3) Relative Grading. These academic programmes are administered by a duly
constituted Academic Committee (AC) through the office of Academics. The AC will be chaired
by Dean (Academics). In the absence of Dean (Academics), Associate Dean (AcademicsPG)/Associate Dean (Academics- UG) will discharge the responsibilities of Dean (Academics).
The Senate of the Institute has formulated a set of guidelines and rules to ensure a high
standard of performance as well as for smooth functioning of the academic programmes. Within
this broad set of guidelines, subject to the approval of Senate, different programmes can
include additional academic requirements as deemed necessary for that programme. These
academic programmes are continuously monitored by the Senate and make appropriate
modifications/ improvements as and when necessary.
2. ACADEMIC SESSION
The academic session normally runs from the end of July in one year to the middle of July in the
next year. The academic session is divided into three parts: two regular semesters and a
summer term as per the following timelines:
Semester I: From the fourth week of July to the last week of November
Semester II: From the last week of December to the last week of April
Summer Term: From the middle of May to the middle of July.
Excluding the days of the examinations, the total number of days of instruction in a semester is
at least 70.
2.1 Academic Calendar
The academic calendar gives the exact dates of all important events during the Academic
Session, such as orientation, registration, the commencement of classes, adding and dropping
of courses, submission of documents, examinations, submission of grades, project evaluation,
declaration of results, mid-semester recess, and vacation. This calendar is approved by the
Senate.
2
3. REGISTRATION
a. Registration: Students are required to register for prescribed credits as per the programme,
on the dates specified in the Academic Calendar. If the student does not register by the date of
registration, she/he can register by paying the fine and register before the date of late
registration.
b. Provisional Registration: A fresh student joining the Institute, who is awaiting the final
results of the qualifying examination, is allowed to register provisionally on submission of a
certificate from her/his last Institute stating that she/he has appeared in the final examination
of the qualifying degree. The student is required to submit documents of having passed the
qualifying examination by the last date given in the Academic Calendar for the registration to be
regularized.
c. Late Registration: If the student does not register by the date of late registration as
mentioned in the Academic Calendar, he/she will be deregistered. The appeal against
deregistration may be made to Chairman, Senate through Dean Academics. Chairman Senate
may permit the continuation of registration on payment of an appropriate fine.
d. Adding and Dropping of Courses: A student may add or drop course(s) with approval of
the Faculty advisor till the last date of registration.
e. Withdrawing from a Course: After the last date of add-drop, a student will have the
option of withdrawing from a course. The last date of course withdrawal will be typically within
four weeks from the beginning of the Semester as specified in the academic calendar. The
withdrawn course will be mentioned in the Student’s grade card with a letter grade ‘W’.
f. Cancellation of Semester Registration: Absence for a period of four or more weeks
during a semester shall result in automatic cancellation of the registration of a student from all
the courses in that semester.
g. Summer course registration: A department may offer summer courses to enable the
students to clear their backlog courses and/or regular credit courses. A course will run during
summer provided a faculty member(s) is available for running the course. The course is offered
on approval of the Dean.
4. TEACHING AND EVALUATION
4.1 Teaching
4.1.1 Medium of Instruction
The medium of instruction is English.
4.1.2 Course Structure
All courses have associated credits. Credits of a course are based on the number of contact
hours for lectures, tutorials, and practicals A student on successful completion of the course
with a passing grade will earn an equivalent number of credits. Based on the required academic
maturity level of students for attending a course, a course is assigned a level. A course can
consist of independent components which can be completed independently. These components
are called fractals. A course is identified by a unique number. Following tables define all
parameters related to course numbering scheme.


9. UNDERGRADUATE PROGRAMMES
IIT Jodhpur currently offers Bachelor of Technology (B. Tech.) programs, and capability linked
opportunities for undergraduate students to complete Minor/Interdisciplinary Area
Specializations or Department Area Specialization. A student can also opt for M.Tech.(dual
degree) in Departmental Area or Minor in Entrepreneurship leading to M.Tech. in
Entrepreneurship or Department Area Specialization in Engineering innovation.
10. UNDERGRADUATE ADMISSIONS
10.1 B.Tech. Programmes
10.1.1 General Admissions
Admissions to the B.Tech. Programmes are made once a year in July through the all-India level
Joint Entrance Examination (JEE) conducted by IITs. The procedures and other requirements for
admission are specified in the JEE Information Brochure brought out every year.
10.1.2 Cultural Exchange Programmes
Admissions are also offered to foreign nationals under the Cultural Exchange Fellowship
Program of the Government of India, administered by Indian Council of Cultural Relations
(ICCR), New Delhi. Persons interested in these programs are required to apply through the
Indian High Commission/Embassy in their respective countries.
10.1.3 Change/Enhancement of Program
A student already admitted to a B.Tech. programme may switch to another department through
branch change. A student can enhance his/her programme to a Minor/Interdisciplinary Area
Specialization leading to M. Tech. in Minor/Interdisciplinary Area, Major/Department Area
Specialization leading to M. Tech. in Department Area, Minor in Entrepreneurship, Minor in
Entrepreneurship leading to M. Tech. in Entrepreneurship and Department Area Specialization in
Engineering innovation (through Industrial Translation). The rules governing these changes are
given in Section 18 (branch change) and Section 11.2 (for all others).
10.2 Reservation Policy
The reservation policy of Government of India will be followed.
10.3 Student Exchange Program
Student Exchange Program provides for a one/two-semester visit by students between the two
academic institutions on a reciprocal basis. The visiting student must be a full-time student
enrolled in a degree program in their Home Institution. The exchange program is open to
full-time undergraduate and graduate students of each Home Institution. It will be executed as
per the pre-approved arrangement (including an MoU) between the institutions.
Selection of students under such program will be made by the DUGC after assessing the
preparedness of students to meet the requirements of the planned coursework/research at the
Host Institution and the relevance of the planned coursework/research to the enrolled degree
program. A visiting student may carry out research or take courses for credit or otherwise or
may use other academic facilities as per pre-approved arrangement (including an MoU).
Under exchange program, a student of IIT Jodhpur can register at another academic institution
in India or abroad with the expectation of credit transfer up to 20 credits per semester in lieu of
the course work or research work through a pre-approved arrangement including an MoU.
14
On return, the student may apply to DUGC for waiver of credits from her/his program
requirements which s/he thinks are equivalent to the courses successfully completed at the
visited academic institution as an exchange student. With the application, the student must
submit an official transcript of the grades obtained by her/him at the visited academic
institution as an exchange student and other documents/material that the concerned DUGC may
require for evaluation. The DUGC will determine, by whatever means it deems fit, the
equivalent credits requirements for which the student may be given a waiver in her/his
programme at IIT Jodhpur. DUGC will submit its recommendations to course equivalence
committee for its approval. Moreover,
● The credits/grades indicated in the grade sheet obtained from the academic institution in
which the student has completed the courses should be used by the student as part of
his/her transcripts.
● IIT Jodhpur transcripts will only indicate the courses, credits and grades completed at IIT
Jodhpur and the total number of credits (without grades) earned in other academic
institutions in a particular semester.
● The CGPA calculation based on credits earned/completed at IIT Jodhpur alone is to be
considered for award of prizes.
● The credits earned at the visited academic institutions will be taken into account for the
calculation of minimum required credits for the award of the degree.
10.4 Visiting Students
A visiting student is a student who is registered for a degree in a recognized institute or
university in India or abroad, and who is officially permitted by that institute or university to
complete part of his/her academic requirements at IIT Jodhpur. For that purpose, the visiting
student may carry out research or take courses for credit or otherwise or may use other
academic facilities.
A person can be admitted as a visiting student on a duly sponsored application to the Dean
(Academics). A visiting student may be admitted for a maximum period of one year. A visiting
student will be required to pay all applicable fees depending upon the status, Program, and
nationality.
Students so admitted also will be governed by all rules, regulations, and discipline applicable to
regular students of the Institute.
10.5 Cancellation of Admission
Students admitted provisionally or otherwise to any Program shall submit copies of their mark
sheets, provisional certificates, etc. of the qualifying examination and other documents by the
last date specified for the purpose in the Academic Calendar. The Senate reserves the right to
cancel the admission of any student, who fails to submit the prescribed documents by the
specified date or to meet other stipulated requirement(s). Also, the Senate reserves the right to
cancel the admission at any later time, if it is found that the student had provided some false
information or suppressed relevant information while seeking admission.
10.6 Fulfillment of Admission Requirements
Admission to any undergraduate Program requires that the applicant be eligible, go through the
laid-down admission procedure, and pay the prescribed fees. The Senate should formally
approve all admissions to the Undergraduate Programmes.



1. Introduction
Traditional curriculum in Computer Science and Engineering (CSE) has focused on two major areas, i.e., theory
and systems (database, computer hardware, and operating systems). With the advent of the era of Edge
Computing, Cloud Computing, Security, AI and Big Data, the discipline is being transformed by the
incorporation of new emerging technologies. The discipline is becoming instrumental in solving major real-world
problems faced by modern society such as healthcare, security, sustainability, and socio-economic challenges.
There is a need to revamp the B.Tech program in CSE so as to prepare students to tackle problems which are
fundamentally multidisciplinary in nature. This would improve IIT Jodhpur’s participation and contribution
towards providing solutions for global challenges. IIT Jodhpur can become a leading source of technology
solutions for self-reliant India.
2. Objectives of the Program
The objective of the B.Tech. program in Computer Science and Engineering (CSE) at IIT Jodhpur is to equip
students to undertake careers involving challenges of working on real-world problems, while innovating with
their core competency in computer science. The curriculum gives due importance to the foundational aspects of
computer science, as well as develops in students the necessary engineering skills for addressing emerging
technological challenges. The program offers flexibility in choosing elective courses for widening the
understanding of emerging concepts and processes in different domains. Students can opt for specializations
which provide a coherent and increasingly sophisticated understanding so as to enable them to pursue preferred
career opportunities. The program will produce a well prepared and well-motivated workforce to undertake
careers in research and industry involving innovation, knowledge creation, engineering, and entrepreneurship.
3. Expected Graduate Attributes
After completing this program, a student will be able to develop an ability to:
1. Apply appropriate knowledge in Computer Science and Engineering to identify, formulate, analyze, and solve
complex engineering problems in order to reach substantive conclusions.
2. Self-learn and engage in use of advanced computing tools.
3. Develop sustainable computing solutions in broader economic, societal and environmental contexts.
4. Think critically, creatively and analytically as a computer scientist, whilst being able to work effectively,
independently and collaboratively as part of a team in research, technology development and entrepreneurial
ventures.
5. Apply evolving ethics and privacy laws across various domains and territories.
6. Effectively communicate engineering concepts and ideas to peers in written or oral forms.
7. Be motivated to engage in independent and life-long learning in the broadest context of evolving technological
challenges.
4. Learning Outcomes
The student will have the ability to:
1. Abstract out computational models based on mathematical rigor.
2. Critically analyse and appreciate emerging and applied fields of computer science owing to deeper
understanding and strong foundations in theoretical computer science.
3. Develop robust, secure, and efficient software systems that would involve software engineering, data
structures, and algorithm design paradigms.
4. Apply different concepts including digital design, computer architecture, operating systems, databases,
networking, and applications for building solutions for real-world problems.
5. Design and implement smart, intelligent, and user friendly interfaces for computer applications.
6. Analyse, design, develop and deploy computer based systems in collaboration with domain experts for
meeting societal needs in areas such as healthcare, safety, environment, law enforcement, transportation, etc.,
by exploiting tools and techniques of Big data, AI and project management.
7. Become proficient in some of the specialized areas such as Computer Vision, Augmented Reality, Internet of
Things, Natural Language Understanding, and Intelligent Communication.



Search Engine Architecture, Retrieval Models, Performance
Evaluation, Text Categorization, Text Clustering, Web
Information Retrieval, Structured Document Retrieval
Techniques Information
Retrieval (PE)
Visual World, Geometry, Lights and Optics, Tracking,
Motion, Depth, Devices and tools
Technique Introduction to
AR and VR
(PE)
Geometric primitives, Clipping, Viewing, Rendering,
Animation, Shading, Coloring, OpenGL
Technique Computer
Graphics (PE)
Eye and early vision, Reasoning systems, Late vision, visual
attention, Cognitive architectures, Knowledge representation
and learning, Neural networks for vision, Applications in
vision tasks
Technique Principles of
Biological
Vision and
Applications
(PE)
Image formation and transformations, Camera calibration,
Image restoration, Spatial and Wavelet-based processing,
Epipolar Geometry, SfM, Optical flow, Key-point detection,
Feature description and matching, Deep learning for vision,
Applications
Technique Computer
Vision (PE)
Data storage methods, data access methods, analysis,
representation, visualization, visual storytelling, Dashboard,
Infographics
Technique Data
Visualization
(PE)
Neural Networks, Gradient Descent, Optimization,
Regularization, Autoencoder, Convolutional Neural Network,
Recurrent Neural Network, LSTM, Deep Generative Models,
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN), Deep Belief Network,
Deep Convolutional GAN, Variational Autoencoder,
Representation Learning, Unsupervised Pre-training, Transfer
Learning, Distributed Representation, Domain Adaptation,
Neural Language Model, Adversarial Learning
Technique Deep Learning
(PE)
Kernel Machines, Variants of Support Vector Machines, PAC
Theory, Boosting, Graphical Models, Structural Predictions,
Deep Reinforcement Learning, Space Coding
Core and
Technique
Advanced
Machine
Learning (PE)
Decision-making, Utility Theory, Utility Functions, Decision
Networks, Sequential Decision Problems, Partially Observable
MDP, Game Theory, Reinforcement Learning, Generalization,
Policy Search, Hidden Markov Model, Kalman Filter,
Knowledge Representation, Ontological Engineering,
Situation Calculus, Semantic Networks, Description Logic,
Planning graphs, Partial-order Planning, Conditional
Planning, Continuous Planning, Multi-agent Planning,
Hierarchical Task Network Planning, Non-deterministic
Domains
Core Advanced
Artificial
Intelligence
(PE)
Neuromorphic Engineering, Neuroanatomy of human brain,
Neuron models, Plasticity rules, Learning rules, Spiking
Neural Networks (SNN), Nanodevices for Neuron
Implementation, Synaptic emulation, Electronic synapses,
Digital/Analog neuromorphic VLSI, Hardware
implementation of synaptic circuits, Synaptic programming
Technique Neuromorphic
Design and
Computing
(PE)



Message from Chairperson (ES Undergratuate Commitee)

Engineering applications generally require multidisciplinary knowledge, spanning across various disciplines of engineering and sciences. Knowledge in humanities along with engineering and/ or sciences are also finding important applications. B.Tech. in Engineering Sciences (ES) is a unique bachelors degree program of IIT Jodhpur which aim to impart core knowledge in two targeted focus areas in Science and Engineering, to meet demands of emerging industrial and academic requirements.

Any student admitted to IIT Jodhpur can opt for B.Tech. in Engineering science post 1st year. Students will be required to complete core courses of ES, in the first two years of study whereas they can outline their own curriculum, in the guidance of faculty advisor, in the form of electives for the remaining two years, from courses across disciplines of engineering, science, and humanities. In line with regular B.Tech. programs, students can also use 10 credits out of stipulated electives and 10 additional credits to earn minor/ specialization as an add-on to the B.Tech. degree. The flexibility of curriculum selection, as per students’ capabilities and interest with faculty guidance, aims to impartsufficient knowledge to the students, to be future ready professionals.

Institute Background and Vision

Innovations, Scientific Discoveries, and New Technologies are the essential foundations of the Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur. The institute focuseson building solid and in-depth knowledge in the engineering domains and strongly encourages interdisciplinary learning. The courses offered are defined such that it enhances the imagination and creativity of the students to identify and solve new problems in society. Our endeavour is to build an atmosphere for uninhibited ideas.The institute offers 9 B.Tech programs: Computer Science & Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Engineering Sciences, Artificial Intelligence and Data Science, Mechanical Engineering, Bioengineering, Materials Engineering, Chemical Engineering and Civil and Infrastructure Engineering.The institute also empowers students by allowing them to avail specializations, minors, and elective courses.

Program Background

Engineering Science is a unique branch of engineering designed to cater to the upcoming demand of the industry and research, training the best of students to have a strong foundation in every field along with a specialization in their topic of interest. Our institute is one of the primary institutes offering an Engineering Science program. This programme is a four-year course. The first two years are devoted to topics which we believe all Engineering undergraduates should study. In the third and fourth years, the students have the opportunity to study any two complementary disciplines by drafting their own course structure. This fosters multi-disciplinary thinking and integrated application of engineering, scientific and mathematical principles in young students. The students can specialise/minor in any field as well.



iHub Drishti, IIT Jodhpur is a Technology Innovation Hub focussed around “Computer Vision, Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality”. It is a Section-8, Not-for-profit Organisation, promoted by and at the Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur under a National Mission on Interdisciplinary Cyber Physical Systems (NM-ICPS) of the Government of India. The hub, steered by the Hub Governing Board and the Director of the TIH, will host teams of faculty members, research scholars, developers and scientists who will work towards developing the technologies. Further, four different kinds of partners are identified: (i) research collaborators from national and international institutions, (ii) domain expert partner institutions, (iii) hub and spoke model (mentor-mentee) based partner institutions, and (iv) research labs and industry including startups. The TIH envisions creating an ecosystem in and around the thematic areas and building collaborations with other TIHs to foster the overall growth and development of CPS technologies. The facility would include a mix of office and laboratory spaces with state-of-the-art infrastructure facilities, that will cater to the collaborating institutions. The TIH will also build a network of researchers and developers, both externally hired and from the student body, such that in the next 5 years, iHub Drishti becomes the main hub of technologies related to computer vision, virtual and augmented reality in the entire country.





1. INTRODUCTION
Academic programmes at Indian Institute of Technology, Jodhpur are designed to develop the
highest calibre human resource capable of understanding the new patterns of knowledge
creation across disciplines obliterating traditional boundaries between science, humanities, social
sciences and engineering. IIT Jodhpur aims to produce quality professionals who would be able
to address profound and wide-ranging societal challenges of the 21st century such as energy,
food, water, housing, mobility, and health. In addition to imparting scientific knowledge, IIT
Jodhpur endeavours to inculcate human qualities of courage, integrity, fairness, humility and
team effort among its graduates through curricular, co-curricular and extra-curricular activities on
campus.
The academic programmes focus on developing a temper for the life long process of learning,
creative thinking and exploring. The postgraduate academic programmes focus on developing
deep understanding of the subject of study coupled with creative inquisitiveness and the ability
to address and solve new problems with free and objective mind.
The academic programmes are based on three tenets of (1) semester system, (2) Credit System
and (3) Relative Grading. These academic programmes are administered by a duly constituted
Academic Committee (AC) through the office of Academics. The AC will be chaired by Dean
(Academics). In the absence of Dean (Academics), Associate Dean (Academics- PG)/Associate
Dean (Academics- UG) will discharge the responsibilities of Dean (Academics).
The Senate of the Institute has formulated a set of guidelines and rules to ensure high standard
of performance as well as for smooth functioning of the academic programmes. Within this
broad set of guidelines, subject to the approval of Senate, different programmes can include
additional academic requirements as deemed necessary for that programme. These academic
programmes are continuously monitored by the Senate and make appropriate modifications/
improvements as and when necessary.
2. ACADEMIC SESSION
The academic session normally runs from the end of July in one year to the middle of July in the
next year. The academic session is divided into three parts: two regular semesters and a summer
term as per the following timelines:
Semester I: From the fourth week of July to the last week of November
Semester II: From the last week of December to the last week of April
Summer Term: From the middle of May to the middle of July.
Excluding the days of the examinations, the total number of days of instruction in a semester is at
least 70.
2.1 Academic Calendar
The academic calendar gives the exact dates of all important events during the Academic
Session, such as orientation, registration, the commencement of classes, adding and dropping of
courses, submission of documents, examinations, submission of grades, project evaluation,
declaration of results, mid-semester recess, and vacation. This calendar is approved by the
Senate.
3. REGISTRATION
a. Registration: Students are required to register for prescribed credits as per the programme, on
the dates specified in the Academic Calendar. If the student does not register by the date of
registration, she/he can register by paying the fine and register before the date of late
registration.
b. Provisional Registration: A fresh student joining the Institute, who is awaiting the final results
of the qualifying examination, is allowed to register provisionally on submission of a certificate
from her/his last Institute stating that she/he has appeared in the final examination of the
qualifying degree. The student is required to submit documents of having passed the qualifying
examination by the last date given in the Academic Calendar for the registration to be
regularized.
c. Late Registration: If the student does not register by the date of late registration as mentioned
in the Academic Calendar, he/she will be deregistered. The appeal against deregistration may be
made to Chairman, Senate through Dean Academics. The Chairman Senate may permit the
continuation of registration on payment of an appropriate fine.
d. Adding and Dropping of Courses: A student may add or drop course(s) with approval of the
Faculty advisor till the last date of registration.


5. GRADING SYSTEM
5.1 Letter Grades
At the end of the semester, a student is awarded a relative letter grade in each course by the
Instructor offering the course considering the performance of the student during the semester
with respect to those of the other students registered in the course. It is proposed that ten
regular letter grades, namely A*, A, A-, B, B-, C, C-, D, E and F shall be awarded in each course.
Each letter grade is associated with a numerical equivalent on a 10-point scale shown in Table 5.1.
In addition, there are four special letter grades, namely, I, S, X and U, which stand for Incomplete,
Satisfactory, Thesis Continuation and Unsatisfactory, respectively. The faculty member shall
upload grades on the portal as per stipulated time schedule.
Table 5.1 Letter grade and its equivalent grade points
S.N. Letter Grade Grade Points Comment
1 A* 10 Exceptional
2 A 10 Outstanding
3 A- 9 Excellent
4 B 8 Very Good
5 B- 7 Good
6 C 6 Average
7 C- 5 Below Average
8 D 4 Marginal
9 E 2 Poor
10 F 0 Fail
11 I Incomplete
12 S Satisfactory in Course
13 X Thesis Continuation
14 U Unsatisfactory
15 W Withdrawn
A detailed description of some of the grades is given below:
S.N. Grades Description
1 A*
‘A*’ grade has the same grade point as ‘A’ grade. The grade ‘A*’ indicates exceptional
performance and is awarded only in the Course/(s) in which the number of registered
students is more than 50. It should not exceed 2 % of the total strength of the particular
theory or lab course. The grade ‘A*’ is not awarded for projects /seminars.
2 E ‘E’ Grade will be awarded to a student who has scored marks less than the cutoff marks for
‘D’ Grade and has met the attendance criterion of the institute. Students who obtain an ‘E’
Grade will be eligible to appear in an additional examination. If they perform satisfactorily,
they become eligible for getting the ‘E’ grade converted to a ‘D’ Grade, otherwise, they will
continue to have ‘E’ Grade. The student will have only one chance to appear for the
additional examination for an ‘E’ Grade. The additional examination will be conducted
within the first week of the next semester. The date of additional examination of Institute
core courses for undergraduate students will be centrally notified, while for all other
courses, the date would be announced by the respective course coordinators. A student
can appear for a maximum of three such additional tests in a given semester. If a student
cannot appear for the test due to any reason(s), he/she will not get any additional chance.
If a student with ‘E’ grade in a course does not pass the course through the additional test,
or obtains an ‘F’ grade in the course, he/she has to repeat the course if it is a core course.
In case the course is an elective, the student may take the same course again or any other
course. ‘E’ and ‘F’ Grades are not counted in the calculation of the CGPA; however, these
are taken into account in the calculation of the SGPA.
3 I An ‘I’ grade is temporarily awarded to a student on his/her request to denote incomplete
performance in a course on approval of an instructor. An ‘I’ grade is awarded in case of
missing an evaluation component due to absence on medical grounds or other special
circumstances. Requests for ‘I’ grade should be made at the earliest but not later than the
last day of major tests. All evaluation requirements for such students in the corresponding
course(s) should be completed on or before the last date of add and drop of courses
specified in the academic calendar. Upon completion of all course requirements, the ‘I’
grade is converted to a regular grade.
4 S This grade is awarded to a student with satisfactory performance in non-graded and Audit
courses or in a thesis after successful completion of the open seminar. The grades
obtained in an audit course are not considered in the calculation of SGPA or CGPA.
5 X This grade is awarded to a student in a course for continuation.
6 U This grade is awarded to a student with unsatisfactory performance in thesis, audit or
non-graded courses.
7 W This grade is awarded to a student who has opted to withdraw from a course. Withdrawal
from a course is permitted until the date specified in the Academics Calendar.
5.2 Procedure for declaration of results
The following procedure would be followed for declaration of results and time line would be as
per Academic Calendar.
1. Evaluation scheme to be displayed by instructors at the start of a semester
2. Display of answer sheets and all scores by instructors
3. Finalization of grades by Instructors
4. Grade moderation by department/institute level committee for department/institute
wide cou



10.2.9 Admission to Ph.D. (sponsored/external/part-time)
a) Candidates admitted in this category shall not be a registered student in any other academic
program in India or abroad.
b) The applicant must have a master’s degree in engineering, pharmacy, agricultural science,
science, humanities, social sciences, management with at least 60% marks or at least 6.0/10
CPI or CGPA for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST),
OR
c) The applicant must have MBBS with MD/MS, BVSc with MVSc, BDS with MDS, BPTh with
MPTh, BOTh with MOTh or equivalent with at least 60% marks or at least 6.0/10 CPI or CGPA
for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST) in bachelor’s degree,
OR
d) The applicant must have a bachelor’s degree of minimum four year duration in engineering
or science or medicine or pharmacy or agricultural science or veterinary science or
equivalent with at least 70% marks or at least 7.0/10 CPI or CGPA for GEN/OBC (65% for
SC/ST) .
e) The applicant must have a minimum of two years work experience (after qualifying degree)
in industry/R&D laboratories/Academic Institutions at the time of registration to the
program.
f) The applicant must qualify written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.
10.3 Admission of Non-Degree Students
A non-degree student is a student who is registered for a degree in a recognized institute or
university in India or abroad, and who is officially sponsored by that institute or university to
complete part of his/her academic requirements at IIT Jodhpur. For that purpose, the non-degree
student may carry out research or take courses for credit or otherwise or may use other
academic facilities.
Any candidate can be admitted as a casual student for specific courses provided the candidate
satisfies the minimum eligibility criteria specified in Section 10.2. The application must be routed
through the office of Dean R&D. A casual student can register up to a maximum of 9 credits in a
semester. On successful completion of the course, students will be awarded with a Course
Completion Certificate and Grade obtained. A casual student can also accumulate credits to
petition for a certificate or a diploma from IIT Jodhpur.
Students so admitted will be governed by all rules, regulations and discipline of the Institute.



11.4 Maximum Duration of the Program
[Back to index]

The maximum duration for the completion B.Tech. Programs shall be 14 registered semesters.

11.5 Academic Performance Requirements
[Back to index]

The minimum requirements on credits earned for continuation in a B. Tech. Programme at the end of the second registered semester is specified in the following table:

Criteria for continuation at the end of the second registered semester
Description	Minimum number of credits to be earned
GEN/OBC/GEN-EWS	SC/ST/PD
Minimum for Continuation	18	14
If a student does not meet the criterion specified in Table 11.3, he/she may opt to restart the programme or else their registration will be terminated. The restart will be permitted only once.

If a student chooses to restart after the first two registered semesters, then the credits earned and semesters registered till that point will not be counted towards the graduation requirements. The re-start will be indicated on the transcript.

11.6 Assistantship for B.Tech. -M. Tech. Dual-degree Programmes
[Back to index]

The students of dual-degree programmes will be considered for award of institute research/ teaching assistantship if they have earned 150 credits by the end of the eighth semester. Only those students who have either qualified GATE or have a CGPA more than 8.0 will be eligible for this assistantship. The assistantship will be provided for a maximum period of 14 months beginning from the summer semester following the eighth semester, provided the student is registered for M.Tech. Major Project in that semester. A student availing assistantship will be required to provide 8 hours of assistance per week besides his/ her normal academic work. For continuation of assistantship, a student will need to secure SGPA of 6.5.

A student receiving assistantship will be eligible for a total of 30 days leave during the 14-month period. He/she will not be entitled to mid-semester breaks, winter and summer vacations.

12. UG Registration
[Back to index]

12.1 Summer Courses
[Back to index]

Students can register for courses during summer up to a maximum of Eight Credits on payment of registration fee at prescribed rates. The summer term is not a regular semester and only academically deficient students (who have low CGPA and/or fewer credits than advised by the curriculum till that point in the programme), Major students, Minor students, and such students who are short of maximum Eight Credits to complete all graduation requirements may register during this period.

For core courses, only students with failed backlog may be considered for summer registration. In case any vacancies are left in the courses being offered during the summer term once the requirements of the above categories of students are fulfilled, other students may register for these courses to fulfil some of their graduation requirements in advance.

The total number of contact hours for the courses remains the same as that during the regular semesters, and therefore the courses run at an accelerated pace. The evaluation and grading patterns also remain the same as during the regular semesters.

12.2 Limits on Registration
[Back to index]

An undergraduate student should register for a minimum of 12 credits in a semester.The maximum number of credits permitted for a UG student in a semester is 25.An undergraduate student may be permitted to register for a maximum of four credits per semester for independent-study or self-study course

12.3 Exceptions to Regular Rules regarding Academic Load
[Back to index]

Under-load: Students who are identified as academically deficient (on academic probation) may register for a maximum of 16 credits.
Over-load: Overloading may be allowed only for students who are not on academic probation and satisfy one of the following criteria: Students are allowed to overload only when they need 70 or less additional credits to complete all the requirements of their programme. Beyond the second semester, any student with a CGPA of 7.5 or higher may be allowed to overload.
12.4 Change of Registration from B. Tech. Programme to B.Tech.- M. Tech. dual degree Programme
[Back to index]

A B.Tech. Student having opted for major/minor specialization with CGPA 6 or more at the end of the seventh semester and fulfilling requirements mentioned earlier may be allowed to switch to B.Tech.- M. Tech. dual degree program in the chosen specialization at the beginning of the eighth semester. The M.Tech degree can be any one of the approved programmes of the institute. All requirements of M.Tech. Degree will be applicable to all such students. All such changes of registration shall be reported to the Senate.

13. Evaluation of Special UG only courses
[Back to index]

13.1 B.Tech. Project Evaluation
[Back to index]

DUGC will appoint a committee for B.Tech. Project evaluation. The committee will ensure that Award of letter grade would be as per relative grading policy.The evaluation will be based on the report and a viva-voce examination on the project.DUGC will form the evaluation criterion and declare it to students.
The evaluation will be based on the report and a viva-voce examination on the project
DUGC will form the evaluation criterion and declare it to students
13.2 Composition of Department Undergraduate Committee (DUGC)
[Back to index]

The DUGC will be constituted of all UG Faculty Advisors and Head of Department. The Head of Department will be the chairperson and one of the faculty advisors would be the convenor.

13.3 Engineering Innovation
[Back to index]

At the completion of an Engineering Innovation Project the student will submit a reportwhich will be evaluated by duly appointed examiner(s) by DUGC.The evaluation will be based on the report and a viva-voce examination on the project/
The evaluation will be based on the report and a viva-voce examination on the project/Entrepreneurship and a letter grade is awarded.
Evaluation policy has to be declared by the concerned department from the first day ofthe class.
13.4 Design Project Evaluation
[Back to index]

At the completion of a project, the student will submit a project report which will be evaluated by duly appointed examiner(s) by DUGC.The evaluation will be based on the report and a viva-voce examination on the project and S or U grade is awarded.Evaluation policy has to be declared by the concerned department from the first day of the class.

13.5 Conduct and Evaluation of B.Tech. -M. Tech Dual Degree Project
[Back to index]

Allotment of students to supervisors will be made based on the preferences of the students and supervisor(s).The supervisor and area identification must be completed by the end of the eighth semester.Coordinator, M. Tech. Program would advise until the student is assigned to a regular supervisor(s).The evaluation criterion would be same as Section 25.
The supervisor and area identification must be completed by the end of the eighth semester
Coordinator, M. Tech. Program would advise until the student is assigned to a regular supervisor(s).
The evaluation criterion would be the same as Section 25.
13.6 Entrepreneurship Project
[Back to index]

At the completion of Entrepreneurship, the student will submit a report which will be evaluated by duly appointed examiner(s) by Dean (Academics-UG)/Associate Dean (Academics-UG).
The evaluation will be based on the report and a viva-voce examination on the Entrepreneurship and a letter grade is awarded.
14. Termination
[Back to index]

14.1 Termination from B.Tech. Program
[Back to index]

A student may be terminated from the B.Tech. Programme by AC, if the student

(a) Is absent without authorized leave of absence for eight weeks or more in a semester; OR
(b) Fails to report and register by the last date of registration without a bonafide reason; OR
(c) Violates the code of conduct, involves in ragging, etc. as confirmed by a Committee constituted for the purpose; OR
(d) Does not earn the prescribed minimum number of credits within the maximum duration of the program; OR
(e) Is on academic probation for two consecutive semesters.
14.2 Appeal against Termination
[Back to index]

A student, who is terminated from the B.Tech. Program can appeal to the Chairman, Senate, for reconsideration. While making such an appeal, the student is expected to give reasons for poor academic performance and/or why the termination should be reconsidered. The Senate shall take a final decision after considering all the available inputs. But, the Senate will not entertain any further appeal for review, unless substantial additional information is brought to its notice.

15. Leave Rules
[Back to index]

Application for leave of absence should be addressed to the Convener DUGC, and submitted with a medical certificate, if applicable. Usually, leave must not be availed of without prior approval of the DUGC.

15.1 Mid-Semester Recess and Vacation
[Back to index]

Undergraduate students are entitled to avail of mid-semester recess and vacation as specified in the Academic Calendar.

15.2 Short Leave
[Back to index]

A student may be granted leave of absence during the semester for a maximum of 10 days on medical grounds, and for 5 days for any other valid reason.

15.3 Semester Withdrawal
[Back to index]

It may be applicable in unforeseen circumstances or for medical reasons. Absence for a period of four or more weeks in any semester will result in automatic withdrawal from that semester. DUGC can approve and intimate Office of Academics regarding the leave of the student for records. In case, the leave extends beyond a semester, it can only be approved through the Academic Committee. Semester withdrawal on the medical ground will not be counted towards the maximum permissible duration of the programme for the student.

15.4 Academic Leave
[Back to index]

To help students broaden their horizons and gain course/work experience, she/he may be permitted to proceed to other academic institutes/ Industry/ R&D organization in India or abroad. Academic leave can be requested for any of the following reasons, such as

Fieldwork
Experimental work/training using specialized facility not available at IITJ
Entrepreneurship initiative
Product realization through industrial translation
Exchange program – as part of an exchange program with an academic institution in India or abroad
Internship work
All such requests must be evaluated and approved by DUGC before the leave is granted.A student may be allowed to spend a maximum duration of one summer term and two semesters on academic leave.A student during academic leave can earn a maximum of 20 credits per semester as certified by the DUGC and approved by the Course Equivalence Committee.

16. Branch Change
[Back to index]

The branch change of the student in another branch and engineering science is permitted after the completion of the 1st year after completing all academic requirements of the credits including non-graded courses. The eligibility criteria of the branch change is as follows:

E1: The student must have completed all prescribed course credits for the previous semesters (including the non-graded courses).
E2: The student has no backlog.
E3: No disciplinary Action has been imposed on the student.
Table: Summary of branch change criteria for students in UG (B.Tech./ B.S.) Programs

After Sem	Branch Enrolled	Branch Applied	CGPA	Eligibility	Lower Limit	Upper Limit
II	Any	Any	CGPA ≥ 8.5 Others
CGPA ≥ 7.5 (For SC,ST, PWD)	E1
E2
E3	90% of current Strength	110% of Sanctioned Strength
II	Any	ES	CGPA ≥ 8 Others
CGPA ≥ 7 (For SC,ST, PWD)	E1
E2
E3	90% of current Strength	30
Note: 1. No Branch Change post second year onwards.

2. This will be applicable to UG Students admitted in academic year 2025-26.
3. If the calculated upper limit of permissible strength is a fractional number, the upper limit for seats will be the lower rounded number (floor operation).
4. If the calculated lower limit of permissible strength is a fractional number, the lower limit for seats will be the higher rounded number (ceil operation).

Discontinuation of Branch Change from Academic Year 2026–27 in UG Programs.



17. Requirements
[Back to index]

A student is deemed to have completed the requirements for graduation if she/he has met the conditions laid down in the following Clauses 17.1 to 17.4

17.1 Minimum Duration of Residence
[Back to index]

Minimum residential requirement
S.No.	Program	Minimum Duration of Residence (in semesters)
1	B. Tech. (including minor/department/interdisciplinary area specialization)	6
2	B. Tech. – M.Tech.	8
17.2 Academic
[Back to index]

The student shall be declared to have fulfilled the academic requirements if she/he has earned the minimum credits as per Table 11.2 in Section 11.3 for all degrees.

17.3 Payment of Fees and Dues
[Back to index]

The degree will be awarded after obtaining No Dues Clearance from all concerned sections as deemed necessary by Dean (Academics).

17.4 No case of Disciplinary Action
[Back to index]

The student shall not be considered to have completed the Academic Requirements if there is any case of indiscipline pending against her/him.

17.5 Completion of engagement in NCC, NSS or NSO
[Back to index]

The student should have completed extra-curricular activity like performing arts, sports, National Cadet Corps, National Service Schemes, and National Sports Organisation for a period of at least two Semesters during their B.Tech. Program.

17.6 Award of Degrees
[Back to index]

17.6.1 Provisional Certificate
A student who completes all the graduation requirements specified in Clauses 17.1 to 17.4, can be provided a provisional certificate by the office of Dean (Academics) on the approval of Chairman, Senate. Certificate will have mention of major, minor, Department or Interdisciplinary Specialization wherever applicable.

17.6.2 Degree Certificate
A student who completes all the graduation requirements specified in Clauses 17.1 to 17.4, is recommended by the Senate to the Board of Governors (BOG) for the award of the appropriate degree in the ensuing convocation. The degree can be awarded only after the BOG accords its approval. Certificate will have mention of major, minor, Department or Interdisciplinary Specialization wherever applicable.

17.6.3 Withdrawal of Degree
Under extremely exceptional circumstances, where gross violation of the graduation requirements is detected at a later stage, the Senate may recommend to the Board of Governors withdrawal of a degree already awarded to the student.

18. Amendments
[Back to index]

Notwithstanding anything contained in this document, the Senate of IIT Jodhpur reserves the right to modify/amend without notice, the curricula, procedures, requirements, and rules pertaining to its B.Tech. Programs.

Regulations for Postgraduate Programmes
[Back to index]

19. Postgraduate Programmes
[Back to index]

The Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur currently offers the following Postgraduate programmes.

Master of Science (M.Sc.)
Dual degree: M.Sc.-M.Tech
Master of Technology (M.Tech.)
Dual degree: M.Tech.-PhD.
Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.)
20. Postgraduate admissions
[Back to index]

The process of admission for all the programs offered by the Institute normally is underway during April-May for Semester 1 and during November-December for Semester 2. In addition, the department may process applications for admissions to PhD programs on a continuous basis and admit students as per the existing procedure.

20.1 Categories of Admission
[Back to index]

A candidate can be admitted in any one of the following categories

Full-time regular
Full-time sponsored
Part-time
External
Executive
However, all categories are not applicable for all PG Programs. Further, programmes can be offered in a combination of these modes (like fully sponsored part-time program).

i) Full-time Regular
In campus student who can register for up to full credit permissible per semester. A student supported by a project of the institute will be considered a full-time regular student.

ii) Full-time Sponsored
In campus student who can register for up to full credit permissible per semester. The candidate is sponsored either by his/her employer or by self. A self-sponsored candidate must have two years of relevant industrial/R&D/academic experience.

iii) Part-time
A part-time student is a working professional who, while employed, attend regular classes as per the schedule of the Institute. The student must be employed in the neighbourhood of IIT Jodhpur. The student must produce a NOC from the employer for pursuing the programme at IIT Jodhpur. The student can register only for a limited number of credits as compared to a full-time regular student.

iv) External
A student working in an industry/R&D establishment/academic institution which is equipped with the necessary research and library facilities. The employer must relieve the student to stay in the campus to complete the minimum residency requirements.

v) Executive (only for M. Tech.)
A professional who can carry out/complete the programme requirement in

An accelerated fashion (minimum in 12 months), OR
Accumulates credits as per convenience and petitions a degree in a maximum of 6 years.
The part-time or full-time mode by attending courses offered in synchronized remote contact mode and limited direct interaction
20.2 Eligibility for Admission
[Back to index]

The eligibility conditions given below are the absolute minimum. Departments may prescribe any requirements over and above, subject to the approval of the Senate.
The number of admissions that can be made to any program shall be decided by the Senate from time to time.
Reservation of seats for various reserved categories shall be prescribed by the Board of Governors.
20.2.1 Admission to M. Sc. Program (Regular)
The admission to the M.Sc. Programs offered by the Institute will be through any one of the following two avenues.

The applicants qualified through the Joint Admission Test for Master (JAM) organized by IITs.
The applicants having a bachelor’s degree in any relevant discipline (3- or 4-year program) may be admitted based on written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.
The applicants under the category (b) must have a minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as specified by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category 4.4 for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) OR a first-class as specified by the university/institute.

20.2.2 Admission to M Sc – M Tech Dual Degree Program (Regular)
The admission to the M. Sc.-M.Tech. Dual Degree Programs offered by the Institute will be through any one of the following two avenues

The applicants qualified through the Joint Admission Test for Master (JAM) organized by IITs.
The applicants having a bachelor’s degree in any relevant discipline (3- or 4-year program) may be admitted based on written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.
The applicants under the category (b) must have a minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as specified by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category 4.4 for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) OR a first-class as specified by the university/institute.

20.2.3 Admission to M Tech Program (Regular)
The applicant must have bachelor’s degree in engineering or science (4 year program) or a master’s degree in science, MCA, Pharmacy, Medical Sciences, Agricultural Sciences and Veterinary Sciences or in a related field
A minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as specified by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category (4.4 for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) or a first-class as specified by the university/institute.
The applicant must either have a valid GATE score or exempted from GATE as per MHRD circular or have qualified an equivalent National Examination or have qualified in the written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.
20.2.4 Admission to MTech Program (Executive/Part-time/ External/Sponsored)
The applicant must have bachelor’s degree in engineering or science (4-year program) or a master’s degree in science, MCA, Pharmacy, Medical Science, Agricultural Science and Veterinary Science or in a related field.
A minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as specified by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category (4.4 for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) or a first-class as specified by the university/institute.
The applicant must have a minimum of two years of work experience (after qualifying degree) in industry/R&D laboratories/Academic Institutions at the time of registration to the program. However, the credit accumulation for the program may start immediately after the qualifying degree. Petitioning for the degree can happen only 1 year after registration.
The applicant must qualify the written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.
20.2.5 Admission to M .Tech. – Ph.D. Dual Degree Program (Regular)
The applicant must have bachelor’s degree in engineering or science (4-year program) or a master’s degree in science, MCA, Pharmacy, Medical Science, Agricultural Science and Veterinary Science or in a related field
A minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as specified by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category 4.4 for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) or a first-class as specified by the university/institute.
The applicant must either have a valid GATE score or exempted from GATE as per MHRD circular or have qualified an equivalent National Examination or have qualified in the written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.
20.2.6 Admission to Ph.D. Program (Regular)
Candidates admitted in this category shall not be a registered student in any other academic program in India or abroad, and shall not be a full-time or part-time employee of any organization in India or abroad.
The applicant must have a master’s degree in engineering, pharmacy, agricultural science, science, humanities, social sciences, management with at least 60% marks or at least 6.0/10 CPI or CGPA for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST),
The applicant must have MBBS with MD/MS, BVSc with MVSc, BDS with MDS, BPTh with MPTh, BOTh with MOTh or equivalent with at least 60% marks or at least 6.0/10 CPI or CGPA for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST) in bachelor’s degree,
The applicant must have a bachelor’s degree of minimum four-year duration in engineering or science or medicine or pharmacy or agricultural science or veterinary science or equivalent with at least 70% marks or at least 7.0/10 CPI or CGPA for GEN/OBC (65% for SC/ST).
20.2.7 Admission under any special scheme like Quality Improvement Programme (QIP), Defence Personnel
The procedures and criteria for admission of these candidates can be decided with the approval of Chairman, Senate.

20.2.8. Admission of Indian Nationals Residing Abroad (INRA) and Foreign Nationals
INRA candidates must have been residing abroad continuously for at least one year at the time of applying for admission.

The applications of INRA and foreign nationals may be processed by the departments as and when they are received or according to any schedule convenient to the department. The applications should be scrutinized to make sure that, both in terms of qualifications and attainment they are comparable with the candidates admitted in the general category. Department will conduct VC based interview for ascertaining suitability of the candidate.

The applications of foreign nationals, who are sponsored by the Indian Council of Cultural Relations (ICCR) will be scrutinized by the department concerned to assess their suitability for admission to the programme. The department’s recommendation will be sent to the Chairperson, Senate through the Chairperson, AC.

20.2.9 Admission to Ph.D (sponsored/external/part-time)
Candidates admitted in this category shall not be a registered student in any other academic program in India or abroad.
The applicant must have a master’s degree in engineering, pharmacy, agricultural science, science, humanities, social sciences, management with at least 60% marks or at least 6.0/10 CPI or CGPA for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST),
The applicant must have MBBS with MD/MS, BVSc with MVSc, BDS with MDS, BPTh with MPTh, BOTh with MOTh or equivalent with at least 60% marks or at least 6.0/10 CPI or CGPA for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST) in bachelor’s degree,
The applicant must have a bachelor’s degree of minimum four-year duration in engineering or science or medicine or pharmacy or agricultural science or veterinary science or equivalent with at least 70% marks or at least 7.0/10 CPI or CGPA for GEN/OBC (65% for SC/ST).
The applicant must have a minimum of two years of work experience (after qualifying degree) in industry/R&D laboratories/Academic Institutions at the time of registration to the program.
The applicant must qualify the written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.
20.3 Admission of Non-Degree Students
A non-degree student is a student who is registered for a degree in a recognized institute or university in India or abroad, and who is officially sponsored by that institute or university to complete part of his/her academic requirements at IIT Jodhpur. For that purpose, the non-degree student may carry out research or take courses for credit or otherwise or may use other academic facilities.

Any candidate can be admitted as a casual student for specific courses provided the candidate satisfies the minimum eligibility criteria specified in Section 20.2. The application must be routed through the office of Dean R&D.

Students so admitted will be governed by all rules, regulations and discipline of the Institute.

20.4 Reservation Policy
The reservation policy of Government of India will be followed.

21 PG Registration
[Back to index]

21.1 Limits on Registration
[Back to index]

Maximum and minimum number of credits a student can register in different programs:

M.Sc.: An M.Sc. student can register for a maximum of 24 credits and a minimum of 10 credits in a semester.
M.Tech.: An M.Tech. student can register for maximum and minimum credits as per Table 21.1.
Table 21.1 Maximum and Minimum Credits an M.Tech. student can register for during the Regular semester/Summer Term

 	M.Tech. student registered under different categories	Maximum Credits	Minimum Credits
Regular Semester	Executive (Accelerated)	24	10
Executive (Normal)	17	10
Executive (Slow-Paced)	12	3
Executive (Part-Time)	12	3
Full-time (Regular/Sponsored)	17	10
External	20	10
Part-time	12	3
Summer Term	Executive (Accelerated)	16	0
Executive (Normal)	9	0
Executive (Slow-Paced)	6	0
Full-time (Regular)	9	5
Full-time (Sponsored)	9	0
External	9	0
Part-time	6	0
Maximum and Minimum Credits an M.Tech. student can register for during the Regular semester/Summer Term[Insert TableTable 21.1 Maximum and Minimum Credits an M.Tech. student can register for during the Regular semester/Summer Term]
 

M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree/Direct Ph.D. (Joining after B.Tech.) – The maximum and minimum credits that an M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree student can register are equivalent to that of an M.Tech. (Regular/External/Part-time) student.
Ph.D.: A Ph.D. student can register for maximum and minimum credits as per Table 21.2.
Table 21.2 Maximum and Minimum Credits a Ph.D. student (Regular) can register for during the Regular semester

Ph.D. student registered under different categories	Maximum Credits	Minimum Credits
Full-time Regular	12	6
External	12	6
Part-Time	12	3
21.1.1 Registration Kept Alive (RKA)
A student admitted to an M.Tech program who has at least completed minimum credit requirement of the first semester, can keep his studentship alive while he is pursuing any professional activity, by opting for RKA in subsequent semesters. The candidate must indicate his intent of RKA before the last date of late registration through DRC to Dean(academic). The candidate has to pay appropriate registration fees for RKA status. A student can maintain RKA status for a maximum of 6 semesters.

21.2 Change of Registration from M.Tech. Programme to M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree Programme
[Back to index]

A regular student registered for the M.Tech. programme having CGPA 8 or more at the end of the second semester may be allowed to switch to M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree program till the end of the third semester. As a special case, a student can switch to a dual degree in the fourth semester with the approval of DRC, provided his/her CGPA is 8 or more, who will then be required to complete his/her candidacy requirements by the end of the fifth semester. All conditions of M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree program will be applicable to all such students. All such changes of registration shall be reported to the Senate.

21.3 Change of Registration from Part-Time M.Tech. to Part-Time Ph.D. Program
[Back to index]

A part-time M.Tech. student having CGPA 8 or more after completion of at least 24 credits may be allowed to change his/her registration to the Ph.D. program. The credits earned will be counted towards his/her Ph.D. course work requirements.

21.4 Change of Registration from Full-Time to Part-Time/External Ph.D. Programme
[Back to index]

A student admitted to a full-time Ph.D. programme may be permitted to change to a part-time Ph.D. programme. A student requesting such a conversion must:

have successfully completed his/her candidacy requirement;
get the request endorsed by the supervisor(s) and the DRC;
produce a “No Objection” Certificate from his/her employer for carrying out the research work.
21.5 Maximum Duration of a Program
[Back to index]

M.Sc. – 8 registered semester
M.Tech. (Regular and Part-time/External/Executive) – 12 registered semesters which may include maximum 6 semesters of Registration kept Alive (RKA) after completion of the first semester. Tuition fee post RKA will be same as at of sponsored candidates.
Ph.D. and M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree (Regular and Part-time/External) – 14 registered semesters which may include maximum 6 semesters of Registration kept Alive (RKA) after completion of the two semesters. Tuition fee post RKA will be same as that of sponsored candidates.
Students may request for RKA to Dean (Academics) through DRC.
21.6 Course Registration
[Back to index]

Students will be eligible to register for courses as per the criterion specified in Section 21.1 and Table 4.4. The DRC/ IRC must oversee that the student has not registered for a similar course during her/his Masters or Bachelors program.

22 Academic Requirements
[Back to index]

22.1 Academic Load & Calculation of Credits for a Course for PG Programmes
[Back to index]

The total credits for a course are calculated by taking into account the number of lectures, tutorial, and practical hours (L-T-P) assigned as given in Table 22.1 and 22.2 for M.Sc. and M.Tech. Ph.D. programmes respectively. Each credit is associated with the number of contact hours and the expected number of self-learning hours (on an average) to be spent by the student for each contact hour to meet academic demand of the course.

Table 22.1 LTP-structure and credit assignment for M.Sc.

Type	L-T-P	Distribution of contact and beyond contact Hours#	Total Credits (TC=TH/3)
Contact Hours (CH)	Beyond ContactHours (BCH)	TotalHours(TH)
1 hour of Lecture	1-0-0	1	2	3	1.0
1 hour of Tutorial	0-1-0	1	2	3	1.0
1 hour of Lab	0-0-1	1	0.5	1.5	0.5
1 hour of Project#	0-0-1	1	2	3	1.0
#Contact hour for project refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory, discussion, etc.
Table 22.2 LTP-structure and credit assignment for M.Tech./Ph.D.

Type	L-T-P	Distribution of contact and beyond contact Hours#	Total Credits (TC=TH/4)
Contact Hours (CH)	Beyond ContactHours (BCH)	TotalHours(TH)
1 hour of Lecture	1-0-0	1	3	4	1.0
1 hour of Tutorial	0-1-0	1	3	4	1.0
1 hour of Lab	0-0-1	1	1	2	0.5
1 hour of Project#	0-0-1	1	3	4	1.0
1 hour of Thesis (Ph.D.)	0-0-1	1	3	4	1.0
#Contact hour for project refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory, discussion, etc.

h4> 22.2 Course categories for Masters’ programmes
[Back to index]

Compulsory Course (MC)
Programme Elective (ME)
Open Elective (MO)
Project works (MP)
Non-graded (NG)
22.3 Academic Credit Requirements for M.Sc. Students
[Back to index]

Course categories and academic requirements for M.Sc. students are given below in Table 22.3.

Table 22.3 Programs/ Credits to be earned for MSc students

Programs	Minimum Credits to be earned
MC	ME	MO	MP	Total
M.Sc. (Chemistry)	38	18	6	15	77
M.Sc. (Mathematics)	38	18	6	15	77
M.Sc. (Physics)	38	18	6	15	77
22.4 Academic Credit Requirements for M.Tech. Students/ Executive M.Tech.
[Back to index]

Course categories and academic requirements for M.Tech. students are given below in Table 22.4.

Table 22.4 Minimum Credits to be earned For MTech students

Programs	Minimum Credits to be earned
MC	ME	MO	MP	NG	Total
M.Tech (Sensors and Internet of Things)	19	17	6	16	4	62
M.Tech (Cyber Physical System)	18	18	6	16	4	62
M.Tech (Thermofluids Engineering)	17	17	6	16	4	60
M.Tech (Advanced Manufacturing Engineering and Design)	19	15	6	16	4	60
M.Tech (Metallurgical and Materials Engineering)	16	18	6	16	4	60
M.Tech (Artificial Intelligence)	18	18	6	16	4	62
M.Tech (Computer Science and Engineering)	18	18	6	16	4	62
M.Tech (Bioscience and Bioengineering)	18	17	6	16	4	61
M.Tech (Data and Computational Sciences)	20	15	6	16	4	61
22.5 Academic Credit Requirements for M.Sc. – M.Tech. Dual Degree
[Back to index]

Minimum credit requirements for M.Sc. – M.Tech. Dual Degree is the cumulative sum of credit requirements for respective M.Sc. program and M.Tech. program as mentioned in Sections 22.3 and 22.4.

22.6 Academic Credit Requirements for M.Tech. – Ph.D. Dual Degree
[Back to index]

Course categories and academic requirements for MTech – PhD dual degree students are given below in Table 22.5.

Table 22.5 Minimum Credits to be earned for dual degree MTech and PhD students

Programs	Minimum Credits to be earned
MC	ME	MO	MP	NG	Total
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Sensors and Internet of Things)	19	17	6	16	4	62
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Cyber Physical System)	18	18	6	16	4	62
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Communication and Signal Processing)	17	17	6	16	4	60
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Thermofluids Engineering)	17	17	6	16	4	60
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Manufacturing Engineering)	17	17	6	16	4	60
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Design Engineering)	17	17	6	16	4	60
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Metallurgical and Materials Engineering)	16	18	6	16	4	60
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Computer Science and Engineering)	18	18	6	16	4	62
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Artificial Intelligence)	18	18	6	16	4	62
M.Tech-Ph.D Dual Degree (Bioscience and Bioengineering)	18	17	6	16	4	61
The DRC/ IRC must oversee that the student has not registered for a similar course during Bachelors program and take necessary corrective action by suggesting alternative courses

22.7 Academic Credit Requirements for Ph.D. Students
[Back to index]

The minimum credits to be earned through courses is listed in Table 22.6.

Table 22.6 Credit Requirements for PhD students

S.No.	Ph.D. in	With	Minimum Credits through Course Work	Minimum Credits through Thesis Work
1.0	Engineering discipline/IDRP	M.Tech., M.E. or M.Sc. (Engineering) in an Engineering discipline	12	48
M.Sc. degree in a Science discipline	30	48
B.Tech., B.E. or B.Sc. (Engineering) in an Engineering discipline	30	48
2.0	Science, Humanities or Social Science discipline	M.Sc., M.A. and M.Phil. degree in a Science, Humanities or Social Science discipline	12	48
22.8 Academic Performance Requirements
[Back to index]

22.8.1 Minimum performance for continuation and Graduation in a program
The minimum CGPA requirement for continuation and graduation in a program is given in below Table 22.7.

Table 22.7 Minimum CGPA requirements

Sr. No.	Program	Continuation in Programme	For graduation
1	M.Sc. (only graduation requirement)	Refer 22.8.2	5
2	M.Tech.	5	5
3	Dual Degree (M.Sc. and M.Tech.)	5	5
4	Dual Degree (M.Tech. and Ph.D.)	7	7
5	Ph.D.	7	7.5 at completion of course work
22.8.2 Continuing criteria for M.Sc.
M.Sc.- The student must earn at least 20 credits at the end of the second semester for continuation in the program.



A regular Ph.D. student admitted to the Institute will be eligible for financial assistance as per the norms of IIT Jodhpur.

(a) A candidate having B.Tech./B.S. (four-year program)/Master’s degree with GATE/NET(JRF)/NBHM (or equivalent) can have financial assistance as per MHRD norms/or equivalent applicable for non-science departments.
(b) The requirement of GATE is exempted for an applicant with M.Tech or equivalent post-bachelor’s degree
(c) A student may be exempted from GATE as per MHRD guidelines.
A Ph.D. student would be eligible for enhancement in the scholarship after two years provided the student has met qualifier requirement. The enhanced fellowship will commence from the date of completion of both the conditions. No arrears will be provided due to delay in completing the qualifier requirement. The Teaching/Research Assistantship of a Ph.D. student shall stop from the day of submission of the Thesis.

25. Rules and Regulations For M.Tech./M.Sc._Project
[Back to index]

Allotment of students to supervisors will be made based on the preferences of the students and supervisor(s).
The supervisor and area identification must be completed by the end of the first semester.
Coordinator, M. Tech. Program would advise until the student is assigned to a regular supervisor(s).
Each semester a letter grade will be awarded after examination by a committee consisting of DRC, supervisor(s) and two members conversant with the field of research with at least one member external to the department (maybe outside the Institute also). DRC will appoint examiners in consultation with the supervisor. The same committee may examine more than one thesis. External member can be on VC. DRC will ensure that Award of letter grade would be as per relative grading policy.
A regular full-time student must register for M.Tech Project Part-1 in the summer semester following 2 nd semester. He must obtain a satisfactory grade to continue M.Tech project part-1 in the next semester. His performance in the summer semester will be evaluated by his supervisor.
26 Rules and Regulations for Ph.D./M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree Program
[Back to index]

26.1 Thesis Supervisor(s)
[Back to index]

26.1.1 Selection of Ph.D. Candidates
The selection should be based on merit and capability of the candidate to conduct research. There should at least be a faculty member available or likely to join in the areas of interest of the candidate at the time of selection.

26.1.2 Appointment of Thesis Supervisor(s)
Ph. D. students shall be admitted in the department and no supervisor shall be assigned at the time of selection.
Allotment of students to supervisor(s) will be made based on the preferences of the students and supervisor(s).
For both Ph. D. and M. Tech. – Ph. D. Dual degree supervisor(s) and area identification must be completed by the end of the first semester
The Convener, DRC (Department Research Committee)/Coordinator (Interdisciplinary Research Program) would advise until the student is assigned to a regular supervisor(s).
There shall not be more than two supervisors, in general, for a student. Additional supervisor can be allowed with the approval of Chairman, Senate.
A supervisor from outside the institute, before the qualifier, may be appointed on the request of student/supervisor(s) with the recommendation of the DRC/IRC and the Dean (Academics) and approval of the Chairman, Senate.
The external supervisor will be requested to sign Intellectual Property Right (IPR) and Non-Disclosure Agreement (NDA) documents as a part of acceptance. From the financial point of view the Institute will have no obligation to the external supervisor.
26.1.3 Caretaker Supervisor/Additional supervisor
Whenever the supervisor proceeds on short leave for a period up to one year, the DRC/IRC (Interdisciplinary Research Committee) shall appoint a caretaker supervisor in consultation with the supervisor and the student to take care of the administrative requirements.
Whenever the supervisor proceeds on long leave for a period more than a year, then an additional supervisor needs to be appointed on the suggestion of the supervisor
The supervisor going on lien or sabbatical may continue supervising students and the supervisor can opt for either an additional supervisor or a caretaker supervisor.
The supervisor on his/her retirement or on resignation may continue as a supervisor and will have to opt for an additional supervisor provided the student has cleared qualifier before the supervisor’s retirement/resignation.
26.1.4 Composition of Departmental Research Committee (DRC)
The DRC will consist of coordinators of M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree and Ph.D. programs of the department, head of the Department and Senior Professor/Associate Professor proposed by the Head. The DRC will be Chaired by Professor/Associate Professor nominated by Head of the Department. The Chairman of the DRC will be a member of the Academic Committee. The DRC has to be approved by Dean (Academics). Ph.D. program coordinator will be the convenor of DRC and will be proposed by the head. The tenure for the DRC will be 2 years.

26.1.5 Composition of Interdisciplinary Research Committee (IRC)
The IRC will consist of all coordinators of IDRPs and Senior Professor/Associate Professor as the chairman of the IRC will be nominated by Dean (Academics). The chairman of IRC will be a member of AC. One of the IDRP co-ordinators would be convenor of the committee. The tenure for the IRC will be 2 years. The IRC will be approved by the Dean (Academics).

26.2 Change of Research Supervisor
[Back to index]

Change of supervisor (s), under exceptional circumstances, shall be permitted by Dean (Academics) on the recommendation of the DRC/IRC after obtaining the consent of (i) the student (ii) the present supervisor (s) and (iii) the proposed supervisor(s). If required, realignment of student’s research program will happen under the supervision of the DRC/IRC.

26.3 Student Research Committee (SRC)
[Back to index]

26.3.1 Composition of SRC
The SRC will normally consist of supervisor(s) and three other faculty members conversant with the field of research with at least one member external to the department (maybe outside the Institute also).
A Student Research Committee (SRC) for the candidate shall be proposed by the supervisor(s), recommended by the DRC/IRC and approved by Dean (Academics).
The SRC shall have one member identified as Chairman for administrative functions and the supervisor(s) will act as convener. Chairman, SRC is to be appointed by Dean (Academics).
The appointment of SRC should be completed by the end of the first semester.
Any subsequent changes in the composition of SRC shall be communicated through the DRC/IRC to Dean (Academics) for record
Chairman and supervisor(s) shall be the internal examiners for the evaluation of the thesis.
The SRC is expected to monitor the progress of the candidate until the completion of the program.
26.4 Annual Progress Monitoring Meeting (APM)
[Back to index]

The academic progress of all registered Ph.D. students will be reviewed once in a year by the SRC and peers in the institute. The review will be based upon (i) Annual Progress Report and (ii) A Poster Presentation open to all. SRC will award a Satisfactory/Non-Satisfactory grade based upon (i) and (ii). Two consecutive Non-satisfactory grades will lead to termination of registration.

For implementational convenience, academic calendar must indicate two days in a year for conducting annual progress evaluation of research scholars. Following the groupings of students and scheduling guidelines are suggested

1. For students joining in 1st semester of AY: During 1st July to 30th September of the year.
2. For students joining in 2nd semester of AY: During 1st December to 28th February of the year.
The first APM will be conducted after the successful completion of qualifier requirements. Each semester “Satisfactory” progress or “Unsatisfactory” progress will be reported by the supervisor(s) through the SRC for record. Any situation in exception to the above will be processed by the academic committee and approved by Dean (academics)

26.5 Qualifier requirements of Ph.D. Student
[Back to index]

The following four components together will constitute qualifier (candidacy) requirements for a Ph. D. student and for a Ph. D. candidate to be eligible for the enhanced SRF fellowship.

1. Completed course requirements with the minimum CGPA specified in Section 22.8.1
2. Cleared comprehensive examination
3. Successful presentation on state of the art of the chosen field of research
4. Successful presentation and defense of Research proposal
The Ph. D. students are normally expected to complete successfully the Qualifier requirements before the beginning of the fifth semester of his/her registration in the Ph. D. program and in any case not later than the beginning of the sixth semester after their registration in the Ph. D. program. Part-time candidates will need to complete the qualifier requirement before the beginning of the seventh semester.

26.5.1 Comprehensive Examination of Ph. D. /M.Tech-Ph.D Student
The comprehensive examination must be designed to test the general capability of the student and the breadth of his/her knowledge in the discipline and areas related to the field of research.
The Comprehensive Examination shall be conducted by a Comprehensive Examination Committee of the Department/IDRP.
The Comprehensive Examination will consist of a written test with three papers.
Departments will offer at least 5 Papers for conducting a comprehensive examination. Each paper will have broad coverage of one essential sub-area of the department. The course content of these papers will be approved by the academic committee and the Senate. The syllabus of papers for the comprehensive examination will not be the same as courses offered by the department; it must be designed to test the breadth of the knowledge in that area.
The SRC will specify a set three papers as a comprehensive requirement for a particular student. These three papers may be selected from across the departments.
The comprehensive examination requirements shall be intimated to the Ph.D. student within two weeks of SRC formation.
All comprehensive examinations will be scheduled on two fixed days in a year. It can coincide with the annual progress evaluation day of doctoral candidates. Students may decide to appear for three papers on the same day or on different days.
A student can appear in the comprehensive examination before he/she has completed the course requirements and satisfied the minimum specified CGPA requirement.
If the performance of the Ph.D. student in a comprehensive examination paper in the first attempt is not satisfactory, he/she will be given one more opportunity to appear within six months of the first attempt.
For clearing of the comprehensive examination, a student must perform satisfactorily in all papers.
Comprehensive Examination to be completed by the students:

Ph.D. : within 3 semesters
Direct Ph.D. and MTech – PhD Dual Degree: within 5 semesters
26.5.2 State of Art Seminar (SOTA)
Every Ph.D. student is required to give a general seminar in the Department covering the State of Art of the area of research. The presentation must also include patent landscaping of the area. The presentation will be evaluated by the SRC. A candidate must have a satisfactory grade in SOTA awarded by SRC for becoming eligible to present his research proposal.

26.5.3 Research Proposal
Research proposal (report + presentation) will be evaluated by SRC after successful completion of SOTA. The research proposal must include representative research work equivalent to research work worth 16 credits. SRC will allocate a letter grade based on the performance of the candidate.

26.6. Candidacy for the Ph.D. Degree
[Back to index]

A student enrolled in the Ph.D. program is formally admitted to the candidacy for the Ph.D. degree after he/she has completed the qualifier requirements for the degree. Only such students who are admitted to the candidacy will be allowed to submit Ph.D. thesis.

26.7 Relaxation in M.Tech. -Ph.D. dual degree program
[Back to index]

M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree students who have successfully completed all qualifier requirements, under exceptional conditions, as approved by SRC after 3 years can also convert into part-time/external Ph.D. student and exit with M.Tech degree if all conditions for part-time/external conversion are satisfied.
The renewal of their registration for every semester however, will be considered only if SRC finds their progress to be satisfactory and recommends the continuance of registration.
26.8 Cancellation of Registration
[Back to index]

The registration of a student whose progress is not found to be satisfactory by the SRC or who has not enrolled will be liable for cancellation.
The registration of a student who has not submitted his/her thesis before the end of the maximum permissible period specified in Section 21.5 will be liable for cancellation.
26.9 Synopsis
[Back to index]

Synopsis will consist of an open seminar and a comprehensive internal closed-door assessment of the research work, through a pre-synopsis report, by SRC
The student can submit the synopsis only if the SRC is satisfied with the quality and quantity of the work for submission as a Ph.D. thesis.
Publications arising out of the thesis are to be submitted along with the pre-synopsis report
Students should submit the synopsis and thesis within six months of the open seminar date. If required, an extension of three months may be permitted by Dean (Academics) on the recommendation of SRC.
If the synopsis and thesis are not submitted in the specified period, the student will be asked to present the synopsis again.
On satisfactory completion of the prescribed courses with minimum CGPA specified in 4.6.1, the comprehensive examination, the SOTA, the research work and the synopsis, the student shall submit the requisite copies of the synopsis of his/her research work in the required format through the supervisor(s) and HoD to the Academic Section for consideration of the SRC.
The student should have at least one paper either published or accepted for publication in a refereed journal/refereed conference (SRC members are required to certify the quality of journals/conference).
26.10 Thesis submission and Evaluation
[Back to index]

The supervisor(s) shall propose a list of 10 examiners consisting of at least four Faculty Members from abroad and 4 Faculty Members from India, who have the expertise in the area in which the student undertook research. For selecting an examiner, the following guidelines should be followed

The examiners shall have at least 6 years of Post-Ph.D. experience;
No two proposed examiners shall be from the same organization; and
The examiners can be Faculty Members or Scientists, of standing and repute.
Chairman, Senate may ask for additional names for examiners.
The Chairman, Senate, shall select minimum two examiners from the proposed list, of which at least one should be an examiner from outside India. The consent of these examiners shall be taken before sending the Thesis to them. In addition, SRC and Supervisor(s) shall be the examiners of the Thesis.
The Viva Voce will be conducted in the presence of SRC, supervisor(s) and the external examiner.
One of the external examiners shall attend the Thesis Defense.
The examiners shall submit a written report on the thesis within a period of two months from the date of receipt of the Thesis.
If both examiners declare the Thesis as acceptable for award of Ph.D. degree, the Dean (Academics) shall request the Supervisor(s) to hold the Thesis Defense by the student.
If any of the examiners reject the Thesis for the award of the Ph.D. degree, the Dean (Academics) shall report the matter to the Chairman, Senate, for further consideration. The Chairman, Senate, will refer the Thesis to a third examiner under special circumstances; else the registration of the student shall stand cancelled in the Ph.D. program.
If both examiners reject the Thesis for the award of the Ph.D. degree, no degree shall be awarded by the Institute, and the registration of the student shall stand cancelled in the Ph.D. program.
If an examiner suggests a revision of the Thesis, the student shall resubmit the Thesis after the revision within a prescribed time period of 6 months in consultation with the Supervisor(s).
When both examiners recommend the Thesis as accepted for the student to defend the Thesis, or after the resubmission of the Thesis after incorporating the suggestions/corrections given by the examiners, the student shall publicly present the Thesis and defend the contention of the Thesis.
The committee consisting of Chairman SRC, Supervisor(s), the Examiner from within India and other Faculty Members (quorum would be Chairman, SRC, Supervisor(s) and an external examiner), who participated in the Comprehensive Examination of the student, shall evaluate the Thesis Defense of the Ph.D. student also. On their recommendation, Dean (Academics) shall recommend to Senate, to consider the award of Ph.D. degree to the student.

